In a 1969 essay, Jack Chambers — who had already achieved critical and
commercial success as a painter, and had made five films which explored
the formal and thematic possibilities of 16mm in profound and inventive
ways — defined perception as “a sensory communication that occurs on a
primary level between organisms: through the skin to the core and back
through the skin again into the exterior world.” Chambers’ declared goal
was to create a work that lends the viewer the artist’s perspective and
experience of the world he depicts — a quality he named “perceptual
realism,” which he contended could be achieved through a combination of
technical mastery, the appropriate use of technology (most importantly
the camera), and the artist’s careful attention to the details of daily
life.

No film in the artist’s oeuvre better accomplishes this aim than The
Hart of London, which Chambers began working on the same year he
authored the above-cited essay — and the same year he was diagnosed with
the leukemia that he would eventually succumb to in 1978. Using his
hometown of London, Ontario as a focal point, in Hart Chambers explores
the cycles of life and death, the relationship between man and nature,
and the beauty and brutality of human existence. Central to the first
part of the film are images of the eponymous hart, bounding through
snowy meadows and suburban backyards until, trapped in a chain-link
enclosure, he is shot and killed. Chambers embeds this violent episode
within an elliptical history of London created from black-and-white
footage derived from a local TV station, photographs and home movies,
and links brutality at home to images of destruction elsewhere when
images of the carcasses of culled deer emerge after the fleeting glimpse
of a Vietnamese child’s face deformed by napalm. Accompanying these
scenes, sounds evocative of winter wind gaining force and then subsiding
serve as a consistent counterpoint to the visual rhythms on screen.

The central section of the film juxtaposes images of birth and death,
cutting between the birth of a baby and the slaughter of sheep. Chambers
contrasts the child’s clinical delivery (involving forceps and an
episiotomy) with the brutal intimacy of the traditional Spanish
slaughterhouse; a bleeding, convulsing sheep on a blood-soaked stone
table (the film’s first colour shot), glowing red lamb fetuses and a
moving tangle of entrails fill the frame between shots of the newborn.
Moving back to the exterior world from the blood-red core, Chambers
documents a day on the beach — replete with dazzling blue water and sun
shining on the tanned skin of his family — before returning to
black-and-white images of London and places beyond. A final colour
sequence shows Chambers’ two sons feeding docile deer in a local park,
as their mother’s voice repeatedly cautions “you have to be very
careful” — a moment of communion reflecting Chambers’ idea that “The
more we are familiar with the experiences that perception brings, the
more we become aware of an inherent gentleness in the intercommunication
of oneself with things. So gentleness of perception is also a
communication that influences the outside world.” Heralded by Stan
Brakhage as one of “the few GREAT films of all cinema,” The Hart of
London has inspired numerous filmmakers, critics and scholars, and
continues to be a revelation for new generations of film viewers.
Chambers’ achievement in simultaneously creating a distinctive portrait
of a place in time while exploring existential themes developed through
a unique and inventive use of the film form remains nothing short of
visionary.